SciPy 1.12.0 Release Notes
====================

SciPy `1.12.0` is the culmination of `6` months of hard work. It contains
many new features, numerous bug-fixes, improved test coverage and better
documentation. There have been a number of deprecations and API changes
in this release, which are documented below. All users are encouraged to
upgrade to this release, as there are a large number of bug-fixes and
optimizations. Before upgrading, we recommend that users check that
their own code does not use deprecated SciPy functionality (to do so,
run your code with ``python -Wd`` and check for ``DeprecationWarning`` s).
Our development attention will now shift to bug-fix releases on the
1.12.x branch, and on adding new features on the main branch.

This release requires Python `3.9+` and NumPy `1.22.4` or greater.

For running on PyPy, PyPy3 `6.0+` is required.

Highlights of this release
===================
- Experimental support for the array API standard has been added to part of
  `scipy.special`, and to all of `scipy.fft` and `scipy.cluster`. There are
  likely to be bugs and early feedback for usage with CuPy arrays, PyTorch
  tensors, and other array API compatible libraries is appreciated. Use the
  ``SCIPY_ARRAY_API`` environment variable for testing.
- A new class, ``ShortTimeFFT``, provides a more versatile implementation of the
  short-time Fourier transform (STFT), its inverse (ISTFT) as well as the (cross-)
  spectrogram. It utilizes an improved algorithm for calculating the ISTFT.
- Several new constructors have been added for sparse arrays, and many operations
  now additionally support sparse arrays, further facilitating the migration
  from sparse matrices.
- A large portion of the `scipy.stats` API now has improved support for handling
  ``NaN`` values, masked arrays, and more fine-grained shape-handling. The
  accuracy and performance of a number of ``stats`` methods have been improved,
  and a number of new statistical tests and distributions have been added.


New features
==========

`scipy.cluster` improvements
============================
- Experimental support added for the array API standard; PyTorch tensors,
  CuPy arrays and array API compatible array libraries are now accepted
  (GPU support is limited to functions with pure Python implementations).
  CPU arrays which can be converted to and from NumPy are supported
  module-wide and returned arrays will match the input type.
  This behaviour is enabled by setting the ``SCIPY_ARRAY_API`` environment
  variable before importing ``scipy``. This experimental support is still
  under development and likely to contain bugs - testing is very welcome.


`scipy.fft` improvements
====================
- Experimental support added for the array API standard; functions which are
  part of the ``fft`` array API standard extension module, as well as the 
  Fast Hankel Transforms and the basic FFTs which are not in the extension
  module, now accept PyTorch tensors, CuPy arrays and array API compatible
  array libraries. CPU arrays which can be converted to and from NumPy arrays
  are supported module-wide and returned arrays will match the input type.
  This behaviour is enabled by setting the ``SCIPY_ARRAY_API`` environment
  variable before importing ``scipy``. This experimental support is still under
  development and likely to contain bugs - testing is very welcome.

`scipy.integrate` improvements
========================
- Added `scipy.integrate.cumulative_simpson` for cumulative quadrature
  from sampled data using Simpson's 1/3 rule.

`scipy.interpolate` improvements
=========================
- New class ``NdBSpline`` represents tensor-product splines in N dimensions.
  This class only knows how to evaluate a tensor product given coefficients
  and knot vectors. This way it generalizes ``BSpline`` for 1D data to N-D, and
  parallels ``NdPPoly`` (which represents N-D tensor product polynomials).
  Evaluations exploit the localized nature of b-splines.
- ``NearestNDInterpolator.__call__`` accepts ``**query_options``, which are
  passed through to the ``KDTree.query`` call to find nearest neighbors. This
  allows, for instance, to limit the neighbor search distance and parallelize
  the query using the ``workers`` keyword.
- ``BarycentricInterpolator`` now allows computing the derivatives.
- It is now possible to change interpolation values in an existing
  ``CloughTocher2DInterpolator`` instance, while also saving the barycentric
  coordinates of interpolation points.

`scipy.linalg` improvements
======================
- Access to new low-level LAPACK functions is provided via ``dtgsyl`` and
  ``stgsyl``.

`scipy.optimize` improvements
========================
- `scipy.optimize.isotonic_regression` has been added to allow nonparametric isotonic
  regression.
- `scipy.optimize.nnls` is rewritten in Python and now implements the so-called
  fnnls or fast nnls, making it more efficient for high-dimensional problems.
- The result object of `scipy.optimize.root` and `scipy.optimize.root_scalar`
  now reports the method used.
- The ``callback`` method of `scipy.optimize.differential_evolution` can now be
  passed more detailed information via the ``intermediate_results`` keyword
  parameter. Also, the evolution ``strategy`` now accepts a callable for
  additional customization. The performance of ``differential_evolution`` has
  also been improved.
- `scipy.optimize.minimize` method ``Newton-CG`` now supports functions that
  return sparse Hessian matrices/arrays for the ``hess`` parameter and is slightly
  more efficient.
- `scipy.optimize.minimize` method ``BFGS`` now accepts an initial estimate for the
  inverse of the Hessian, which allows for more efficient workflows in some
  circumstances. The new parameter is ``hess_inv0``.
- `scipy.optimize.minimize` methods ``CG``, ``Newton-CG``, and ``BFGS`` now accept
  parameters ``c1`` and ``c2``, allowing specification of the Armijo and curvature rule
  parameters, respectively.
- `scipy.optimize.curve_fit` performance has improved due to more efficient memoization
  of the callable function.

`scipy.signal` improvements
======================
- ``freqz``, ``freqz_zpk``, and ``group_delay`` are now more accurate
  when ``fs`` has a default value.
- The new class ``ShortTimeFFT`` provides a more versatile implementation of the
  short-time Fourier transform (STFT), its inverse (ISTFT) as well as the (cross-)
  spectrogram. It utilizes an improved algorithm for calculating the ISTFT based on
  dual windows and provides more fine-grained control of the parametrization especially
  in regard to scaling and phase-shift. Functionality was implemented to ease
  working with signal and STFT chunks. A section has been added to the "SciPy User Guide"
  providing algorithmic details. The functions ``stft``, ``istft`` and ``spectrogram``
  have been marked as legacy.

`scipy.sparse` improvements
======================
- ``sparse.linalg`` iterative solvers ``sparse.linalg.cg``,
  ``sparse.linalg.cgs``, ``sparse.linalg.bicg``, ``sparse.linalg.bicgstab``,
  ``sparse.linalg.gmres``, and ``sparse.linalg.qmr`` are rewritten in Python.
- Updated vendored SuperLU version to ``6.0.1``, along with a few additional
  fixes.
- Sparse arrays have gained additional constructors: ``eye_array``,
  ``random_array``, ``block_array``, and ``identity``. ``kron`` and ``kronsum``
  have been adjusted to additionally support operation on sparse arrays.
- Sparse matrices now support a transpose with ``axes=(1, 0)``, to mirror
  the ``.T``  method.
- ``LaplacianNd`` now allows selection of the largest subset of eigenvalues,
  and additionally now supports retrieval of the corresponding eigenvectors.
  The performance of ``LaplacianNd`` has also been improved.
- The performance of ``dok_matrix`` and ``dok_array`` has been improved,
  and their inheritance behavior should be more robust.
- ``hstack``, ``vstack``, and ``block_diag`` now work with sparse arrays, and
  preserve the input sparse type.
- A new function, `scipy.sparse.linalg.matrix_power`, has been added, allowing
  for exponentiation of sparse arrays.


`scipy.spatial` improvements
======================
- Two new methods were implemented for ``spatial.transform.Rotation``:
  ``__pow__`` to raise a rotation to integer or fractional power and
  ``approx_equal`` to check if two rotations are approximately equal.
- The method ``Rotation.align_vectors`` was extended to solve a constrained
  alignment problem where two vectors are required to be aligned precisely.
  Also when given a single pair of vectors, the algorithm now returns the
  rotation with minimal magnitude, which can be considered as a minor
  backward incompatible change.
- A new representation for ``spatial.transform.Rotation`` called Davenport
  angles is available through ``from_davenport`` and ``as_davenport`` methods.
- Performance improvements have been added to ``distance.hamming`` and
  ``distance.correlation``.
- Improved performance of ``SphericalVoronoi`` ``sort_vertices_of_regions``
  and two dimensional area calculations.

`scipy.special` improvements
======================
- Added `scipy.special.stirling2` for computation of Stirling numbers of the
  second kind. Both exact calculation and an asymptotic approximation
  (the default) are supported via ``exact=True`` and ``exact=False`` (the
  default) respectively.
- Added `scipy.special.betaincc` for computation of the complementary
  incomplete Beta function and `scipy.special.betainccinv` for computation of
  its inverse.
- Improved precision of `scipy.special.betainc` and `scipy.special.betaincinv`.
- Experimental support added for alternative backends: functions
  `scipy.special.log_ndtr`, `scipy.special.ndtr`, `scipy.special.ndtri`, 
  `scipy.special.erf`, `scipy.special.erfc`, `scipy.special.i0`, 
  `scipy.special.i0e`, `scipy.special.i1`, `scipy.special.i1e`, 
  `scipy.special.gammaln`, `scipy.special.gammainc`, `scipy.special.gammaincc`,
  `scipy.special.logit`, and `scipy.special.expit` now accept PyTorch tensors
  and CuPy arrays. These features are still under development and likely to 
  contain bugs, so they are disabled by default; enable them by setting a 
  ``SCIPY_ARRAY_API``  environment variable to ``1`` before importing ``scipy``. 
  Testing is appreciated!


`scipy.stats` improvements
=====================
- Added `scipy.stats.quantile_test`, a nonparametric test of whether a
  hypothesized value is the quantile associated with a specified probability.
  The ``confidence_interval`` method of the result object gives a confidence
  interval of the quantile.
- `scipy.stats.sampling.FastGeneratorInversion` provides a convenient
  interface to fast random sampling via numerical inversion of distribution
  CDFs.
- `scipy.stats.geometric_discrepancy` adds geometric/topological discrepancy
  metrics for random samples.
- `scipy.stats.multivariate_normal` now has a ``fit`` method for fitting
  distribution parameters to data via maximum likelihood estimation.
- `scipy.stats.bws_test` performs the Baumgartner-Weiss-Schindler test of
  whether two-samples were drawn from the same distribution.
- `scipy.stats.jf_skew_t` implements the Jones and Faddy skew-t distribution.
- `scipy.stats.anderson_ksamp` now supports a permutation version of the test
  using the ``method`` parameter.
- The ``fit`` methods of `scipy.stats.halfcauchy`, `scipy.stats.halflogistic`, and
  `scipy.stats.halfnorm` are faster and more accurate.
- `scipy.stats.beta` ``entropy`` accuracy has been improved for extreme values of
  distribution parameters.
- The accuracy of ``sf`` and/or ``isf`` methods have been improved for
  several distributions: `scipy.stats.burr`, `scipy.stats.hypsecant`,
  `scipy.stats.kappa3`, `scipy.stats.loglaplace`, `scipy.stats.lognorm`,
  `scipy.stats.lomax`, `scipy.stats.pearson3`, `scipy.stats.rdist`, and
  `scipy.stats.pareto`.
- The following functions now support parameters ``axis``, ``nan_policy``, and
  ``keep_dims``: `scipy.stats.entropy`, `scipy.stats.differential_entropy`,
  `scipy.stats.variation`, `scipy.stats.ansari`, `scipy.stats.bartlett`,
  `scipy.stats.levene`, `scipy.stats.fligner`, `scipy.stats.circmean`,
  `scipy.stats.circvar`, `scipy.stats.circstd`, `scipy.stats.tmean`,
  `scipy.stats.tvar`, `scipy.stats.tstd`, `scipy.stats.tmin`, `scipy.stats.tmax`,
  and `scipy.stats.tsem`.
- The ``logpdf`` and ``fit`` methods of `scipy.stats.skewnorm` have been improved.
- The beta negative binomial distribution is implemented as `scipy.stats.betanbinom`.
- Improved performance of `scipy.stats.invwishart` ``rvs`` and ``logpdf``.
- A source of intermediate overflow in `scipy.stats.boxcox_normmax` with
  ``method='mle'`` has been eliminated, and the returned value of ``lmbda`` is
  constrained such that the transformed data will not overflow.
- `scipy.stats.nakagami` ``stats`` is more accurate and reliable.
- A source of intermediate overflow in `scipy.norminvgauss.pdf` has been eliminated.
- Added support for masked arrays to `scipy.stats.circmean`, `scipy.stats.circvar`,
  `scipy.stats.circstd`, and `scipy.stats.entropy`.
- `scipy.stats.dirichlet` has gained a new covariance (``cov``) method.
- Improved accuracy of ``entropy`` method of `scipy.stats.multivariate_t` for large
  degrees of freedom.
- `scipy.stats.loggamma` has an improved ``entropy`` method.

Deprecated features
================

- Error messages have been made clearer for objects that don't exist in the
  public namespace and warnings sharpened for private attributes that are not
  supposed to be imported at all.
- `scipy.signal.cmplx_sort` has been deprecated and will be removed in
  SciPy 1.15. A replacement you can use is provided in the deprecation message.
- Values the the argument ``initial`` of `scipy.integrate.cumulative_trapezoid`
  other than ``0`` and ``None`` are now deprecated.
- `scipy.stats.rvs_ratio_uniforms` is deprecated in favour of
  `scipy.stats.sampling.RatioUniforms`
- `scipy.integrate.quadrature` and `scipy.integrate.romberg` have been
  deprecated due to accuracy issues and interface shortcomings. They will
  be removed in SciPy 1.15. Please use `scipy.integrate.quad` instead.
- Coinciding with upcoming changes to function signatures (e.g. removal of a
  deprecated keyword), we are deprecating positional use of keyword arguments
  for the affected functions, which will raise an error starting with
  SciPy 1.14. In some cases, this has delayed the originally announced
  removal date, to give time to respond to the second part of the deprecation.
  Affected functions are: 

  - ``linalg.{eigh, eigvalsh, pinv}``
  - ``integrate.simpson``
  - ``signal.{firls, firwin, firwin2, remez}``
  - ``sparse.linalg.{bicg, bicgstab, cg, cgs, gcrotmk, gmres, lgmres, minres, qmr, tfqmr}``
  - ``special.comb``
  - ``stats.kendalltau``

- All wavelet functions have been deprecated, as PyWavelets provides suitable
  implementations; affected functions are: ``signal.{daub, qmf, cascade,
  morlet, morlet2, ricker, cwt}``
- ``scipy.integrate.trapz``, ``scipy.integrate.cumtrapz``, and ``scipy.integrate.simps`` have
  been deprecated in favour of `scipy.integrate.trapezoid`, `scipy.integrate.cumulative_trapezoid`,
  and `scipy.integrate.simpson` respectively and will be removed in SciPy 1.14.
- The ``tol`` argument of ``scipy.sparse.linalg.{bcg,bicstab,cg,cgs,gcrotmk,gmres,lgmres,minres,qmr,tfqmr}``
  is now deprecated in favour of ``rtol`` and will be removed in SciPy 1.14.
  Furthermore, the default value of ``atol`` for these functions is due
  to change to ``0.0`` in SciPy 1.14.
  

Expired Deprecations
================
There is an ongoing effort to follow through on long-standing deprecations.
The following previously deprecated features are affected:

- The ``centered`` keyword of `scipy.stats.qmc.LatinHypercube` has been removed.
  Use ``scrambled=False`` instead of ``centered=True``.
- ``scipy.stats.binom_test`` has been removed in favour of `scipy.stats.binomtest`.
- In `scipy.stats.iqr`, the use of ``scale='raw'`` has been removed in favour 
  of ``scale=1``.
-  Functions from NumPy's main namespace which were exposed in SciPy's main
  namespace, such as ``numpy.histogram`` exposed by ``scipy.histogram``, have
  been removed from SciPy's main namespace. Please use the functions directly
  from ``numpy``.


Backwards incompatible changes
=========================

Other changes
===========
- The arguments used to compile and link SciPy are now available via
  ``show_config``.


Authors
======

* Name (commits)
* endolith (1)
* h-vetinari (34)
* Tom Adamczewski (3) +
* Anudeep Adiraju (1) +
* akeemlh (1)
* Alex Amadori (2) +
* Raja Yashwanth Avantsa (2) +
* Seth Axen (1) +
* Ross Barnowski (1)
* Dan Barzilay (1) +
* Ashish Bastola (1) +
* Christoph Baumgarten (2)
* Ben Beasley (3) +
* Doron Behar (1)
* Peter Bell (1)
* Sebastian Berg (1)
* Ben Boeckel (1) +
* David Boetius (1) +
* Matt Borland (1)
* Jake Bowhay (103)
* Larry Bradley (1) +
* Dietrich Brunn (5)
* Evgeni Burovski (102)
* Matthias Bussonnier (18)
* CJ Carey (6)
* Colin Carroll (1) +
* Aadya Chinubhai (1) +
* Luca Citi (1)
* Lucas Colley (141) +
* com3dian (1) +
* Anirudh Dagar (4)
* Danni (1) +
* Dieter Werthmüller (1)
* John Doe (2) +
* Philippe DONNAT (2) +
* drestebon (1) +
* Thomas Duvernay (1)
* elbarso (1) +
* emilfrost (2) +
* Paul Estano (8) +
* Evandro (2)
* Franz Király (1) +
* Nikita Furin (1) +
* gabrielthomsen (1) +
* Lukas Geiger (9) +
* Artem Glebov (22) +
* Caden Gobat (1)
* Ralf Gommers (127)
* Alexander Goscinski (2) +
* Rohit Goswami (2) +
* Olivier Grisel (1)
* Matt Haberland (244)
* Charles Harris (1)
* harshilkamdar (1) +
* Alon Hovav (2) +
* Gert-Ludwig Ingold (1)
* Romain Jacob (1) +
* jcwhitehead (1) +
* Julien Jerphanion (13)
* He Jia (1)
* JohnWT (1) +
* jokasimr (1) +
* Evan W Jones (1)
* Karen Róbertsdóttir (1) +
* Ganesh Kathiresan (1)
* Robert Kern (11)
* Andrew Knyazev (4)
* Uwe L. Korn (1) +
* Rishi Kulkarni (1)
* Kale Kundert (3) +
* Jozsef Kutas (2)
* Kyle0 (2) +
* Robert Langefeld (1) +
* Jeffrey Larson (1) +
* Jessy Lauer (1) +
* lciti (1) +
* Hoang Le (1) +
* Antony Lee (5)
* Thilo Leitzbach (4) +
* LemonBoy (2) +
* Ellie Litwack (8) +
* Thomas Loke (4) +
* Malte Londschien (1) +
* Christian Lorentzen (6)
* Adam Lugowski (10) +
* lutefiskhotdish (1)
* mainak33 (1) +
* Ben Mares (11) +
* mart-mihkel (2) +
* Mateusz Sokół (24) +
* Nikolay Mayorov (4)
* Nicholas McKibben (1)
* Melissa Weber Mendonça (7)
* Michał Górny (1)
* Kat Mistberg (2) +
* mkiffer (1) +
* mocquin (1) +
* Nicolas Mokus (2) +
* Sturla Molden (1)
* Roberto Pastor Muela (3) +
* Bijay Nayak (1) +
* Andrew Nelson (105)
* Praveer Nidamaluri (3) +
* Lysandros Nikolaou (2)
* Dimitri Papadopoulos Orfanos (7)
* Pablo Rodríguez Pérez (1) +
* Dimitri Papadopoulos (2)
* Tirth Patel (14)
* Kyle Paterson (1) +
* Paul (4) +
* Yann Pellegrini (2) +
* Matti Picus (4)
* Ilhan Polat (36)
* Pranav (1) +
* Bharat Raghunathan (1)
* Chris Rapson (1) +
* Matteo Raso (4)
* Tyler Reddy (215)
* Martin Reinecke (1)
* Tilo Reneau-Cardoso (1) +
* resting-dove (2) +
* Simon Segerblom Rex (4)
* Lucas Roberts (2)
* Pamphile Roy (31)
* Feras Saad (3) +
* Atsushi Sakai (3)
* Masahiro Sakai (2) +
* Omar Salman (14)
* Andrej Savikin (1) +
* Daniel Schmitz (55)
* Dan Schult (19)
* Scott Shambaugh (9)
* Sheila-nk (2) +
* Mauro Silberberg (3) +
* Maciej Skorski (1) +
* Laurent Sorber (1) +
* Albert Steppi (28)
* Kai Striega (1)
* Saswat Susmoy (1) +
* Alex Szatmary (1) +
* Søren Fuglede Jørgensen (3)
* othmane tamri (3) +
* Ewout ter Hoeven (1)
* Will Tirone (1)
* TLeitzbach (1) +
* Kevin Topolski (1) +
* Edgar Andrés Margffoy Tuay (1)
* Dipansh Uikey (1) +
* Matus Valo (3)
* Christian Veenhuis (2)
* Nicolas Vetsch (1) +
* Isaac Virshup (7)
* Hielke Walinga (2) +
* Stefan van der Walt (2)
* Warren Weckesser (7)
* Bernhard M. Wiedemann (4)
* Levi John Wolf (1)
* Xuefeng Xu (4) +
* Rory Yorke (2)
* YoussefAli1 (1) +
* Irwin Zaid (4) +
* Jinzhe Zeng (1) +
* JIMMY ZHAO (1) +

A total of 163 people contributed to this release.
People with a "+" by their names contributed a patch for the first time.
This list of names is automatically generated, and may not be fully complete.