SciPy 1.13.0 Release Notes
====================

SciPy `1.13.0` is the culmination of 3 months of hard work. This
out-of-band release aims to support NumPy ``2.0.0``, and is backwards
compatible to NumPy ``1.22.4``. The version of OpenBLAS used to build
the PyPI wheels has been increased to ``0.3.26.dev``.

This release requires Python 3.9+ and NumPy 1.22.4 or greater.

For running on PyPy, PyPy3 6.0+ is required.


Highlights of this release
===================
- Support for NumPy ``2.0.0``.
- Interactive examples have been added to the documentation, allowing users
  to run the examples locally on embedded Jupyterlite notebooks in their
  browser.
- Preliminary 1D array support for the COO and DOK sparse formats.
- Several `scipy.stats` functions have gained support for additional
  ``axis``, ``nan_policy``, and ``keepdims`` arguments. `scipy.stats` also
  has several performance and accuracy improvements.


New features
==========

`scipy.integrate` improvements
========================
- The ``terminal`` attribute of `scipy.integrate.solve_ivp` ``events``
  callables now additionally accepts integer values to specify a number
  of occurrences required for termination, rather than the previous restriction
  of only accepting a ``bool`` value to terminate on the first registered
  event.


`scipy.io` improvements
=======================
- `scipy.io.wavfile.write` has improved ``dtype`` input validation.


`scipy.interpolate` improvements
================================
- The Modified Akima Interpolation has been added to
  ``interpolate.Akima1DInterpolator``, available via the new ``method``
  argument.
- New method ``BSpline.insert_knot`` inserts a knot into a ``BSpline`` instance.
  This routine is similar to the module-level `scipy.interpolate.insert`
  function, and works with the BSpline objects instead of ``tck`` tuples.
- ``RegularGridInterpolator`` gained the functionality to compute derivatives
  in place. For instance, ``RegularGridInterolator((x, y), values,
  method="cubic")(xi, nu=(1, 1))`` evaluates the mixed second derivative,
  :math:`\partial^2 / \partial x \partial y` at ``xi``.
- Performance characteristics of tensor-product spline methods of
  ``RegularGridInterpolator`` have been changed: evaluations should be
  significantly faster, while construction might be slower. If you experience
  issues with construction times, you may need to experiment with optional
  keyword arguments ``solver`` and ``solver_args``. Previous behavior (fast
  construction, slow evaluations) can be obtained via `"*_legacy"` methods:
  ``method="cubic_legacy"`` is exactly equivalent to ``method="cubic"`` in
  previous releases. See ``gh-19633`` for details.


`scipy.signal` improvements
===========================
- Many filter design functions now have improved input validation for the
  sampling frequency (``fs``).


`scipy.sparse` improvements
===========================
- ``coo_array`` now supports 1D shapes, and has additional 1D support for
  ``min``, ``max``, ``argmin``, and ``argmax``. The DOK format now has
  preliminary 1D support as well, though only supports simple integer indices
  at the time of writing.
- Experimental support has been added for ``pydata/sparse`` array inputs to
  `scipy.sparse.csgraph`.
- ``dok_array`` and ``dok_matrix`` now have proper implementations of
  ``fromkeys``.
- ``csr`` and ``csc`` formats now have improved ``setdiag`` performance.


`scipy.spatial` improvements
============================
- ``voronoi_plot_2d`` now draws Voronoi edges to infinity more clearly
  when the aspect ratio is skewed.


`scipy.special` improvements
============================
- All Fortran code, namely, ``AMOS``, ``specfun``, and ``cdflib`` libraries
  that the majority of special functions depend on, is ported to Cython/C.
- The function ``factorialk`` now also supports faster, approximate
  calculation using ``exact=False``.


`scipy.stats` improvements
==========================
- `scipy.stats.rankdata` and `scipy.stats.wilcoxon` have been vectorized,
  improving their performance and the performance of hypothesis tests that
  depend on them.
- ``stats.mannwhitneyu`` should now be faster due to a vectorized statistic
  calculation, improved caching, improved exploitation of symmetry, and a
  memory reduction. ``PermutationMethod`` support was also added.
- `scipy.stats.mood` now has ``nan_policy`` and ``keepdims`` support.
- `scipy.stats.brunnermunzel` now has ``axis`` and ``keepdims`` support.
- `scipy.stats.friedmanchisquare`, `scipy.stats.shapiro`,
  `scipy.stats.normaltest`, `scipy.stats.skewtest`,
  `scipy.stats.kurtosistest`, `scipy.stats.f_oneway`,
  `scipy.stats.alexandergovern`, `scipy.stats.combine_pvalues`, and
  `scipy.stats.kstest` have gained ``axis``, ``nan_policy`` and
  ``keepdims`` support.
- `scipy.stats.boxcox_normmax` has gained a ``ymax`` parameter to allow user
  specification of the maximum value of the transformed data.
- `scipy.stats.vonmises` ``pdf`` method has been extended to support
  ``kappa=0``. The ``fit`` method is also more performant due to the use of
  non-trivial bounds to solve for ``kappa``.
- High order ``moment`` calculations for `scipy.stats.powerlaw` are now more
  accurate.
- The ``fit`` methods of  `scipy.stats.gamma` (with ``method='mm'``) and
  `scipy.stats.loglaplace` are faster and more reliable.
- `scipy.stats.goodness_of_fit` now supports the use of a custom ``statistic``
  provided by the user.
- `scipy.stats.wilcoxon` now supports ``PermutationMethod``, enabling
  calculation of accurate p-values in the presence of ties and zeros.
- `scipy.stats.monte_carlo_test` now has improved robustness in the face of
  numerical noise.
- `scipy.stats.wasserstein_distance_nd` was introduced to compute the
  Wasserstein-1 distance between two N-D discrete distributions.


Deprecated features
================
- Complex dtypes in ``PchipInterpolator`` and ``Akima1DInterpolator`` have
  been deprecated and will raise an error in SciPy 1.15.0. If you are trying
  to use the real components of the passed array, use ``np.real`` on ``y``.
- Non-integer values of ``n`` together with ``exact=True`` are deprecated for
  `scipy.special.factorial`.

Expired Deprecations
================
There is an ongoing effort to follow through on long-standing deprecations.
The following previously deprecated features are affected:
- ``scipy.signal.{lsim2,impulse2,step2}`` have been removed in favour of
  ``scipy.signal.{lsim,impulse,step}``.
- Window functions can no longer be imported from the `scipy.signal` namespace and
  instead should be accessed through either `scipy.signal.windows` or
  `scipy.signal.get_window`.
- `scipy.sparse` no longer supports multi-Ellipsis indexing
- ``scipy.signal.{bspline,quadratic,cubic}`` have been removed in favour of alternatives
  in `scipy.interpolate`.
- ``scipy.linalg.tri{,u,l}`` have been removed in favour of ``numpy.tri{,u,l}``.
- Non-integer arrays in `scipy.special.factorial` with ``exact=True`` now raise an
  error.
- Functions from NumPy's main namespace which were exposed in SciPy's main
  namespace, such as ``numpy.histogram`` exposed by ``scipy.histogram``, have
  been removed from SciPy's main namespace. Please use the functions directly
  from ``numpy``. This was originally performed for SciPy 1.12.0 however was missed from
  the release notes so is included here for completeness.



Backwards incompatible changes
=========================


Other changes
===========
- The second argument of `scipy.stats.moment` has been renamed to ``order``
  while maintaining backward compatibility.




Authors
======

* Name (commits)
* h-vetinari (50)
* acceptacross (1) +
* Petteri Aimonen (1) +
* Francis Allanah (2) +
* Jonas Kock am Brink (1) +
* anupriyakkumari (12) +
* Aman Atman (2) +
* Aaditya Bansal (1) +
* Christoph Baumgarten (2)
* Sebastian Berg (4)
* Nicolas Bloyet (2) +
* Matt Borland (1)
* Jonas Bosse (1) +
* Jake Bowhay (25)
* Matthew Brett (1)
* Dietrich Brunn (7)
* Evgeni Burovski (65)
* Matthias Bussonnier (4)
* Tim Butters (1) +
* Cale (1) +
* CJ Carey (5)
* Thomas A Caswell (1)
* Sean Cheah (44) +
* Lucas Colley (97)
* com3dian (1)
* Gianluca Detommaso (1) +
* Thomas Duvernay (1)
* DWesl (2)
* f380cedric (1) +
* fancidev (13) +
* Daniel Garcia (1) +
* Lukas Geiger (3)
* Ralf Gommers (147)
* Matt Haberland (81)
* Tessa van der Heiden (2) +
* Shawn Hsu (1) +
* inky (3) +
* Jannes Münchmeyer (2) +
* Aditya Vidyadhar Kamath (2) +
* Agriya Khetarpal (1) +
* Andrew Landau (1) +
* Eric Larson (7)
* Zhen-Qi Liu (1) +
* Christian Lorentzen (2)
* Adam Lugowski (4)
* m-maggi (6) +
* Chethin Manage (1) +
* Ben Mares (1)
* Chris Markiewicz (1) +
* Mateusz Sokół (3)
* Daniel McCloy (1) +
* Melissa Weber Mendonça (6)
* Josue Melka (1)
* Michał Górny (4)
* Juan Montesinos (1) +
* Juan F. Montesinos (1) +
* Takumasa Nakamura (1)
* Andrew Nelson (27)
* Praveer Nidamaluri (1)
* Yagiz Olmez (5) +
* Dimitri Papadopoulos Orfanos (1)
* Drew Parsons (1) +
* Tirth Patel (7)
* Pearu Peterson (1)
* Matti Picus (3)
* Rambaud Pierrick (1) +
* Ilhan Polat (30)
* Quentin Barthélemy (1)
* Tyler Reddy (117)
* Pamphile Roy (10)
* Atsushi Sakai (8)
* Daniel Schmitz (10)
* Dan Schult (17)
* Eli Schwartz (4)
* Stefanie Senger (1) +
* Scott Shambaugh (2)
* Kevin Sheppard (2)
* sidsrinivasan (4) +
* Samuel St-Jean (1)
* Albert Steppi (31)
* Adam J. Stewart (4)
* Kai Striega (3)
* Ruikang Sun (1) +
* Mike Taves (1)
* Nicolas Tessore (3)
* Benedict T Thekkel (1) +
* Will Tirone (4)
* Jacob Vanderplas (2)
* Christian Veenhuis (1)
* Isaac Virshup (2)
* Ben Wallace (1) +
* Xuefeng Xu (3)
* Xiao Yuan (5)
* Irwin Zaid (8)
* Elmar Zander (1) +
* Mathias Zechmeister (1) +

A total of 96 people contributed to this release.
People with a "+" by their names contributed a patch for the first time.
This list of names is automatically generated, and may not be fully complete.